[Term Entry] Cybersecurity Malware Rootkit (#2788)
Codecademy/docs: content/cybersecurity/concepts/malware/terms/rootkit/rootkit.md

---
Title: 'Rootkit'
Description: 'A Rootkit is a program, or a collection of software tools, that covertly grants cybercriminals the ability to gain remote access on a targeted computer or system.'
Subjects:
  - 'Cybersecurity'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Cybersecurity'
CatalogContent:
  - 'introduction-to-cybersecurity'
  - 'paths/fundamentals-of-cybersecurity'
---

> A **Rootkit** is a program, or a collection of software tools, that covertly grants cybercriminals the ability to gain remote access on a targeted computer or system. The term "rootkit" originates from [Unix](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/unix)-based operating systems, such as [Linux](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/open-source/linux), where the most privileged account is referred to as "root". The applications that provide unauthorized access to the device at the root or admin level are referred to as the "kit".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **Rootkit** is a program, or a collection of software tools, that covertly grants cybercriminals the ability to gain remote access to a targeted computer or system. The term "rootkit" originates from [Unix](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/unix)-based operating systems, such as [Linux](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/open-source/linux), where the most privileged account is referred to as "root". The applications that provide unauthorized access to the device at the root or admin level are referred to as the "kit".
```

## Malicious Effects of Rootkit

> Rootkits have great power in hiding and can hide in files, registry settings, or processes and steal user information. A rootkit opens a backdoor on victims' systems to introduce malicious software, including [viruses](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/cybersecurity/malware/virus), [ransomware](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/cybersecurity/malware/ransomware), keyloggers, or other malware, or systems that can exploit active security networks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rootkits have significant power in hiding and can conceal themselves within files, registry settings, or processes to steal user information. A rootkit opens a backdoor on victims' systems to introduce malicious software, including [viruses](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/cybersecurity/malware/virus), [ransomware](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/cybersecurity/malware/ransomware), keyloggers, or other malware, as well as systems that can exploit active security networks.
```

> Rootkits attempt to prevent malware from being detected by disabling endpoint antimalware and antivirus software. While the majority of rootkits impact the software and operating system, certain rootkits can also infiltrate a computer's hardware and firmware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rootkits attempt to prevent malware from being detected by disabling endpoint antimalware and antivirus software. While most rootkits impact software and operating systems, certain rootkits can also infiltrate a computer's hardware and firmware.
```

## Types of RootKit

> There are different types of rootkits, and they fall into different categories based on what they do and how long they stay on a system. The ones listed here are the most well-known, but there are even more types out there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Different types of rootkits fall into various categories based on their actions and duration on a system. The following are the most well-known types, but there are more variations:
```

> There are different types of rootkits, and they fall into different categories based on what they do and how long they stay on a system. The ones listed here are the most well-known, but there are even more types out there.
> 

Reviewer 2: [Proofreading] I think using the word "below" instead of "here" would help developers gain a better understanding of where to find the list of rootkits. 
```suggestion
There are different types of rootkits, and they fall into different categories based on what they do and how long they stay on a system. The ones listed below are the most well-known, but there are even more types out there.

```

> - Kernel mode rootkit: Designed to manipulate critical and system files of operating systems and can inject malicious code into the operating system's kernel data structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Kernel mode rootkit: Designed to manipulate critical system files, it can inject malicious code into the operating system's kernel data structure.
```

> - User mode rootkit: Also known by the name "application rootkit", it replaces standard computer files with rootkit files and may even change the way standard programs work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- User mode rootkit: Also known as an "application rootkit", it replaces standard computer files with rootkit files and may alter the way standard programs work.
```

> - Kernel mode rootkit: Designed to manipulate critical and system files of operating systems and can inject malicious code into the operating system's kernel data structure.
> - User mode rootkit: Also known by the name "application rootkit", it replaces standard computer files with rootkit files and may even change the way standard programs work.
> - Firmware rootkit: Can affect a router or BIOS.
> - Bootloader rootkit: Also known as "bootkits," they replace the legitimate bootloader with a corrupted version, compromising the computer's loading process.
> - Memory rootkit: Conceals itself within the computer's Random Access Memory (RAM) and exploits system resources to execute malicious activities unnoticed in the background. Since memory rootkits only reside in the computer's RAM and do not inject malicious code permanently, they disappear as soon as the system is rebooted.

Reviewer 2: [nitpick/question] What are some well-known rootkits? I think naming and adding a link to software in each bullet point would help spring cybersecurity professionals have some idea of what tools they'd use in their line of work. 
```suggestion
- Kernel mode rootkit: Designed to manipulate critical and system files of operating systems and can inject malicious code into the operating system's kernel data structure.
- User mode rootkit: Also known by the name "application rootkit", it replaces standard computer files with rootkit files and may even change the way standard programs work.
- Firmware rootkit: Can affect a router or BIOS.
- Bootloader rootkit: Also known as "bootkits," they replace the legitimate bootloader with a corrupted version, compromising the computer's loading process.
- Memory rootkit: Conceals itself within the computer's Random Access Memory (RAM) and exploits system resources to execute malicious activities unnoticed in the background. Since memory rootkits only reside in the computer's RAM and do not inject malicious code permanently, they disappear as soon as the system is rebooted.
```

## Rootkit Installation Methods

Rootkits are deployed via familiar channels used by any malicious software, such as email phishing campaigns, executable malicious files, malvertising, removable media like USB drives, crafted malicious document files like Microsoft Word, connecting to shared drives that have been compromised, or downloading software infected with the rootkit from risky websites.

## Probable Rootkit Symptoms

Identifying a rootkit is challenging without the aid of specialized tools since various malware exhibit similar destructive behavior. However, certain situations may indicate the presence of a rootkit in the system. Here are some examples:

- Difficulty in Detection.
- Unclear Network Activity.
- Unusual System Behavior.
- Slow Performance.
- Disabled Security Software.
- Unexpected System Modifications.

## Rootkit Prevention

Precautions can be taken to prevent the rootkit from infiltrating the system. A few of these measures include:

> - Keep The system and software updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Keep the system and software updated.
```

- Run security scans regularly.

> - Don't click on suspicious links.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Avoid clicking on suspicious links.
```

> - Don't install unknown software form unreliable sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Refrain from installing unknown software from unreliable sources.
```

---
Title: 'Rootkit'

> Description: 'Rootkit is a type of malware and a program, or a collection of software tools, covertly grants cybercriminals the ability to gain remote access on a targeted computer or system.'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Description: 'A Rootkit is a program, or a collection of software tools, that covertly grants cybercriminals the ability to gain remote access on a targeted computer or system.'
```

Subjects:
  - 'Cybersecurity'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'Cybersecurity'
CatalogContent:
  - 'introduction-to-cybersecurity'
  - 'paths/fundamentals-of-cybersecurity'
---

> **Rootkit** is a type of [malware](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/cybersecurity/malware) and a program, or a collection of software tools, covertly grants cybercriminals the ability to gain remote access on a targeted computer or system. The term "rootkit" originates from [Unix](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/unix)-based operating systems, such as [Linux](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/open-source/linux), where the most privileged account is referred to as "root". The applications that provide unauthorized access to the device at the root or admin level are referred to as the "kit".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A **Rootkit** is a program, or a collection of software tools, that covertly grants cybercriminals the ability to gain remote access on a targeted computer or system. The term "rootkit" originates from [Unix](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/unix)-based operating systems, such as [Linux](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/open-source/linux), where the most privileged account is referred to as "root". The applications that provide unauthorized access to the device at the root or admin level are referred to as the "kit".
```

## Malicious Effects of Rootkit

Rootkits have great power in hiding and can hide in files, registry settings, or processes and steal user information. A rootkit opens a backdoor on victims' systems to introduce malicious software, including [viruses](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/cybersecurity/malware/virus), [ransomware](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/cybersecurity/malware/ransomware), keyloggers, or other malware, or systems that can exploit active security networks.

> Rootkits attempt to prevent malware from being detected by disabling endpoint antimalware and antivirus software. While the majority of rootkits impact the software and operating system, certain rootkits can also infiltrate your computer's hardware and firmware.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rootkits attempt to prevent malware from being detected by disabling endpoint antimalware and antivirus software. While the majority of rootkits impact the software and operating system, certain rootkits can also infiltrate a computer's hardware and firmware.
```
We avoid first- and second-person pronouns in Docs.

## Types of RootKit

> There are different types of rootkits, and they fall into different categories based on what they do and how long they stay on your system. The ones listed here are the most well-known, but there are even more types out there.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are different types of rootkits, and they fall into different categories based on what they do and how long they stay on a system. The ones listed here are the most well-known, but there are even more types out there.
```

> | Rootkit             | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
> | ------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
> | Kernel mode rootkit | Designed to manipulate critical and system files of operating systems<br>and can inject malicious code into the operating system's kernel data structure.                                                                                                                                                                                      |
> | User mode rootkit   | Known by the name application rootkit, it replaces standard computer files with rootkit files<br>and may even change the way standard programs work.                                                                                                                                                                                           |
> | Firmware rootkit    | Hardware or firmware rootkits can affect your router or BIOS.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
> | Bootloader rootkit  | Bootloader rootkits or bootkits replace the legitimate bootloader with a corrupted version,<br>compromising the computer's loading process.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
> | Memory rootkit      | Memory rootkits conceal themselves within the computer's Random Access Memory (RAM)<br>and exploit system resources to execute malicious activities unnoticed in the background.<br>Since memory rootkits only reside in the computer's RAM and do not inject malicious code permanently,<br>they disappear as soon as the system is rebooted. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Kernel mode rootkit: Designed to manipulate critical and system files of operating systems and can inject malicious code into the operating system's kernel data structure.                                                                                                                                                                                      - User mode rootkit:  Also known by the name "application rootkit", it replaces standard computer files with rootkit files and may even change the way standard programs work.                                                                                                                                                                                           - Firmware rootkit: Can affect a router or BIOS.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  - Bootloader rootkit: Also known as "bootkits," they replace the legitimate bootloader with a corrupted version, compromising the computer's loading process.                                                                                                                                                                                                    - Memory rootkit: Conceals itself within the computer's Random Access Memory (RAM) and exploits system resources to execute malicious activities unnoticed in the background. Since memory rootkits only reside in the computer's RAM and do not inject malicious code permanently, they disappear as soon as the system is rebooted. 
```
This works better as a bulleted list rather than a table.

## Rootkit Installation Methods

Rootkits are deployed via familiar channels used by any malicious software, such as email phishing campaigns, executable malicious files, malvertising, removable media like USB drives, crafted malicious document files like Microsoft Word, connecting to shared drives that have been compromised, or downloading software infected with the rootkit from risky websites.

## Probable Rootkit Symptoms

Identifying a rootkit is challenging without the aid of specialized tools since various malware exhibit similar destructive behavior. However, certain situations may indicate the presence of a rootkit in the system. Here are some examples:

> - Difficulty in Detection,
> - Unclear Network Activity,
> - Unusual System Behavior,
> - Slow Performance,
> - Disabled Security Software,
> - Unexpected System Modifications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Difficulty in Detection.
- Unclear Network Activity.
- Unusual System Behavior.
- Slow Performance.
- Disabled Security Software.
- Unexpected System Modifications.
```

> ## Rootkit Preventions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Rootkit Prevention
```

> Similar precautions can be taken to prevent the rootkit from infiltrating the system. A few of these measures include:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Precautions can be taken to prevent the rootkit from infiltrating the system. A few of these measures include:
```

> - Keep The system and software updated,
> - Run security scans regularly,
> - Don't click on suspicious links,
> - Don't install unknown software form unreliable sources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Keep The system and software updated.
- Run security scans regularly.
- Don't click on suspicious links.
- Don't install unknown software form unreliable sources.
```
